On his three-year-old debut, Harzand started the 4/9 favourite for the Blackwater Maiden over ten furlongs at Cork Racecourse on 26 March. He took the lead two furlongs from the finish and won "easily" by sixteen lengths from the Aidan O'Brien-trained Sword Fighter.[6] On 10 April, Harzand was stepped up in class for the Group Three Ballysax Stakes on heavy ground at Leopardstown Racecourse. He was made the 2/1 favourite in a field of seven colts which included the Jim Bolger-trained Moonlight Magic and a three-horse O'Brien entry comprising Cook Islands, Idaho and Beacon Rock. After chasing the leaders in the early stages he moved up on the outside approaching the final furlong, overtook Idaho 100 metres from the finish and won by one and a quarter lengths with a gap of seven and half lengths back to Beacon Rock in third.[7] He showed a lot of quality there. I was caught for a little bit of speed early on and had to sit and suffer, but when I met the rising ground I never had any doubt I'd get to the horse in front as he stays very well. I think he is too big and heavy to go round Epsom, maybe the Irish Derby but I think he has all the qualities for the Leger at Doncaster. The mile and six at Doncaster would be ideal."[8] The form of the race was subsequently boosted when the fifth placed Moonlight Magic won the Derrinstown Stud Derby Trial.[9]

On 4 June, Harzand was one of sixteen colts to contest the 237th running of the Epsom Derby. His participation had been in doubt until shortly before the race as he had dislodged a shoe when being shipped from Ireland and had to spend some time with his affected foot in a bucket of ice.[10] Weld later commented "It was pretty chaotic. He looked pretty unlikely to run. His foot was very sore. My staff poulticed it for the journey over and iced it for four hours. We then got hold of Jim Bolger’s vet, Jim Reilly, who was able to tack the shoe back on. He tapped it on very delicately and then we put it in ice again".[11] Harzand was made the 13/2 third favourite behind US Army Ranger and Wings of Desire in a sixteen-runner field which also included Cloth of Stars, Idaho, Moonlight Magic, Humphrey Bogart (Lingfield Derby Trial) and Algometer (Cocked Hat Stakes). Harzand was held up by Smullen in the early stages and turned into the straight in eighth place behind the pacemaking Port Douglas. He began to make steady progress and moved into second place behind Idaho approaching the last quarter mile before taking the lead a furlong from the finish. He was strongly challenged by US Army Ranger in the closing stages but stayed on strongly to pull ahead again and win by one and a half lengths.[12]

Smullen, who was winning the race first time commented "I spotted the white face of US Army Ranger, but this horse responded to me. The trouble we had with him this morning, I didn't know if he would get here, but it's a great team effort. I'm delighted for them."[13] The Aga Khan was winning the race for the fifth time, equaling the record of his grandfather Aga Khan III. After the race he said "Winning the Derby is the goal of every owner and it’s been the goal of every owner for centuries. We are not in the marketplace for horses. We breed them. All the effort begins before the horses are even bred because you are looking at the matings. Then you breed, you raise, you run and then you take them back to the stud if they are good enough".[10] Weld said "I always wanted to win it, possibly never had a horse good enough".[11] On the following day he praised the colt's "toughness and courage" and identified the Irish Derby and the St Leger as possible targets.[14]